=pod

=head1 NAME

mariadb-tools - Advanced command-line tools for MariaDB

=head1 DESCRIPTION

MariaDB Tools are a collection of advanced command-line tools used by
MariaDB (L<http://www.mariadb.com/>) support staff to perform a variety of
MariaDB and system tasks that are too difficult or complex to perform manually.

These tools are ideal alternatives to private or "one-off" scripts because
they are professionally developed, formally tested, and fully documented.
They are also fully self-contained, so installation is quick and easy and
no libraries are installed. 

MariaDB Tools are derived from Percona Toolkit, Maatkit, and Aspersa, 
which are well-known toolkits for MariaDB server administration.

=head1 TOOLS

This release of MariaDB Tools includes the following tools:

=over

=item mariadb-align-output

Align output from other tools to columns.

=item mariadb-archiver

Archive rows from a MariaDB table into another table or a file.

=item mariadb-backup-manager



=item mariadb-database-summary

Summarize MariaDB information nicely.

=item mariadb-index-checker

Find duplicate indexes and foreign keys on MariaDB tables.

=item mariadb-iostat

An interactive I/O monitoring tool for GNU/Linux.

=item mariadb-kill

Kill MariaDB queries that match certain criteria.

=item mariadb-parted

MySQL partition management script

=item mariadb-query-digest

Analyze MariaDB queries from logs, processlist, and tcpdump.

=item mariadb-schema-change

ALTER tables without locking them.

=item mariadb-stacktrace

Aggregate GDB stack traces for a selected program.

=item mariadb-stat

Collect forensic data about MariaDB when problems occur.

=item mariadb-stat-browser

Browses files created by mariadb-stat.

=item mariadb-status-diff

Look at many samples of MariaDB C<SHOW GLOBAL STATUS> side-by-side.

=item mariadb-summary

Summarize system information nicely.

=item mariadb-system-summary

Summarize system information nicely.

=back

For more free, open-source software developed by MariaDB Foundation, visit
L<http://www.mariadb.com/downloads/>.

=head1 SPECIAL OPTION TYPES

Tool options use standard types (C<int>, C<string>, etc.) as well as
these special types:

=over

=item time

Time values are seconds by default.  For example, C<--run-time 60> means
60 seconds.  Time values support an optional suffix: s (seconds),
m (minutes), h (hours), d (days).  C<--run-time 1m> means 1 minute
(the same as 60 seconds).

=item size

Size values are bytes by default.  For example, C<--disk-space-free 1024>
means 1 Kibibyte.  Size values support an optional suffix: k (Kibibyte),
M (Mebibyte), G (Gibibyte).

=item DSN

See L<"DSN (DATA SOURCE NAME) SPECIFICATIONS">.

=item Hash, hash, Array, array

Hash, hash, Array, and array values are comma-separated lists of values.
For example, C<--ignore-tables foo,bar> ignores tables C<foo> and C<bar>.

=back

=head1 CONFIGURATION FILES

MariaDB Tools can read options from configuration files.  The
configuration file syntax is simple and direct, and bears some resemblances
to the MariaDB command-line client tools.  The configuration files all follow
the same conventions.

Internally, what actually happens is that the lines are read from the file and
then added as command-line options and arguments to the tool, so just
think of the configuration files as a way to write your command lines.

=head2 SYNTAX

The syntax of the configuration files is as follows:

=over

=item *

Whitespace followed by a hash sign (#) signifies that the rest of the line is a
comment.  This is deleted.  For example:

=item *

Whitespace is stripped from the beginning and end of all lines.

=item *

Empty lines are ignored.

=item *

Each line is permitted to be in either of the following formats:

  option
  option=value

Do not prefix the option with C<-->.  Do not quote the values, even if
it has spaces; value are literal.  Whitespace around the equals sign is
deleted during processing.

=item *

Only long options are recognized.

=item *

A line containing only two hyphens signals the end of option parsing.  Any
further lines are interpreted as additional arguments (not options) to the
program.

=back

=head2 EXAMPLE

This config file for mariadb-stat,

  # Config for mariadb-stat
  variable=Threads_connected
  cycles=2  # trigger if problem seen twice in a row
  --
  --user daniel

is equivalent to this command line:

  mariadb-stat --variable Threads_connected --cycles 2 -- --user daniel

Options after C<--> are passed literally to mariadb and mariadbadmin.

=head2 READ ORDER

The tools read several configuration files in order:

=over

=item 1.

The global MariaDB Tools configuration file,
F</etc/mariadb/mariadb-tools.conf>.  All tools read this file,
so you should only add options to it that you want to apply to all tools.

=item 2.

The global tool-specific configuration file, F</etc/mariadb/TOOL.conf>,
where C<TOOL> is a tool name like C<mariadb-query-digest>.  This file is named
after the specific tool you're using, so you can add options that apply
only to that tool.

=item 3.

The user's own MariaDB configuration file,
F<$HOME/.mariadb-tools.conf>.  All tools read this file, so you should only
add options to it that you want to apply to all tools.

=item 4.

The user's tool-specific configuration file, F<$HOME/.TOOL.conf>,
where C<TOOL> is a tool name like C<mariadb-query-digest>.  This file is named
after the specific tool you're using, so you can add options that apply
only to that tool.

=back

=head2 SPECIFYING

There is a special C<--config> option, which lets you specify which
configuration files Percona Toolkit should read.  You specify a
comma-separated list of files.  However, its behavior is not like other
command-line options.  It must be given B<first> on the command line,
before any other options.  If you try to specify it anywhere else, it will
cause an error.  Also, you cannot specify C<--config=/path/to/file>;
you must specify the option and the path to the file separated by whitespace
I<without an equal sign> between them, like:

  --config /path/to/file

If you don't want any configuration files at all, specify C<--config ''> to
provide an empty list of files.

=head1 DSN (DATA SOURCE NAME) SPECIFICATIONS

MariaDB Tools use DSNs to specify how to create a DBD connection to
a MariaDB server.  A DSN is a comma-separated string of C<key=value> parts, like:

  h=host1,P=3306,u=bob

The standard key parts are shown below, but some tools add additional key
parts.  See each tool's documentation for details.

Some tools do not use DSNs but still connect to MariaDB using options like
C<--host>, C<--user>, and C<--password>.  Such tools uses these options to
create a DSN automatically, behind the scenes.

Other tools uses both DSNs and options like the ones above.  The options
provide defaults for all DSNs that do not specify the option's corresponding
key part.  For example, if DSN C<h=host1> and option C<--port=12345> are
specified, then the tool automatically adds C<P=12345> to DSN.

=head2 ESCAPING VALUES

DSNs are usually specified on the command line, so shell quoting and escaping
must be taken into account.  Special characters, like asterisk (C<*>), need
to be quoted and/or escaped properly to be passed as literal characters in
DSN values.

Since DSN parts are separated by commas, literal commas in DSN values must
be escaped with a single backslash (C<\>).  And since a backslash is
the escape character for most shells, two backslashes are required to pass
a literal backslash.  For example, if the username is literally C<my,name>,
it must be specified as C<my\\,name> on most shells.  This applies to DSNs
and DSN-related options like C<--user>.

=head2 KEY PARTS

Many of the tools add more parts to DSNs for special purposes, and sometimes
override parts to make them do something slightly different.  However, all the
tools support at least the following:

=over

=item A

Default character set for the connection (C<SET NAMES>).

Enables character set settings in Perl and MariaDB.  If the value is C<utf8>,
sets Perl's binmode on STDOUT to utf8, passes the C<mysql_enable_utf8> option
to DBD::mysql, and runs C<SET NAMES 'utf8'> after connecting to MariaDB.  Other
values set binmode on STDOUT without the utf8 layer and run C<SET NAMES> after
connecting to MariaDB.

Unfortunately, there is no way from within Perl itself to specify the client
library's character set.  C<SET NAMES> only affects the server; if the client
library's settings don't match, there could be problems.  You can use the
defaults file to specify the client library's character set, however.  See the
description of the F part below.

=item D

Default database to use when connecting.  Tools may C<USE> a different
databases while running.

=item F

Defaults file for the MariaDB client library (the C client library used by
DBD::mysql, I<not MariaDB Tools themselves>).  All tools all read the
C<[client]> section within the defaults file.  If you omit this, the standard
defaults files will be read in the usual order.  "Standard" varies from system
to system, because the filenames to read are compiled into the client library.
On Debian systems, for example, it's usually C</etc/mysql/server.cnf> then
C<~/.my.cnf>.  If you place the following in C<~/.my.cnf>, you won't have
to specify your MariaDB username and password on the command line:

  [client]
  user=your_user_name
  pass=secret

Omitting the F part is usually the right thing to do.  As long as you have
configured your C<~/.my.cnf> correctly, that will result in tools connecting
automatically without needing a username or password.

You can also specify a default character set in the defaults file.  Unlike the
L<"A"> part described above, this will actually instruct the client library
(DBD::mysql) to change the character set it uses internally, which cannot be
accomplished any other way.

=item h

MariaDB hostname or IP address to connect to.

=item L

Explicitly enable LOAD DATA LOCAL INFILE.

For some reason, some vendors compile libmysql without the
--enable-local-infile option, which disables the statement.  This can
lead to weird situations, like the server allowing LOCAL INFILE, but 
the client throwing exceptions if it's used.

However, as long as the server allows LOAD DATA, clients can easily
re-enable it; see L<https://mariadb.com/kb/en/library/load-data-infile/>
and L<http://search.cpan.org/~capttofu/DBD-mysql/lib/DBD/mysql.pm>.
This option does exactly that.

=item p

MariaDB password to use when connecting.

=item P

Port number to use for the connection.  Note that the usual special-case
behaviors apply: if you specify C<localhost> as your hostname on Unix systems,
the connection actually uses a socket file, not a TCP/IP connection, and thus
ignores the port.

=item S

MariaDB socket file to use for the connection (on Unix systems).

=item u

MariaDB username to use when connecting, if not current system user.

=back

=head2 BAREWORD

Many of the tools will let you specify a DSN as a single word, without any
C<key=value> syntax.  This is called a 'bareword'.  How this is handled is
tool-specific, but it is usually interpreted as the L<"h"> part.  The tool's
C<--help> output will tell you the behavior for that tool.

=head2 PROPAGATION

Many tools will let you propagate values from one DSN to the next, so you don't
have to specify all the parts for each DSN.  For example, if you want to specify
a username and password for each DSN, you can connect to three hosts as follows:

 h=host1,u=fred,p=wilma host2 host3

This is tool-specific.

=head1 ENVIRONMENT

The environment variable C<PTDEBUG> enables verbose debugging output to STDERR.
To enable debugging and capture all output to a file, run the tool like:

   PTDEBUG=1 mariadb-kill ... > FILE 2>&1

Be careful: debugging output is voluminous and can generate several megabytes
of output.

=head1 SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS

Most tools require:

=over

=item * Perl v5.8 or newer

=item * Bash v3 or newer

=item * Core Perl modules like Time::HiRes

=back

Tools that connect to MariaDB require:

=over

=item * Perl modules DBI and DBD::mysql

=item * MariaDB 5.0 or newer

=back

MariaDB Tools officially support and are tested on many popular Linux
distributions and MariaDB 10.1 and above.

=head1 AUTHORS

=over

=item Baron Schwartz

Baron created Maatkit, from which Percona Toolkit was forked. Many of
the tools and modules were originally written by Baron.

=item Daniel Nichter, Frank Cizmich, Carlos Salguero

Daniel has been the project's lead developer since 2008 until 2016. Frank was 
a full-time Percona Toolkit developer employed by Percona until 2016. Carlos
has been the project's lead developer since 2016. He is hired by Percona.

=item Manjot Singh

Manjot worked to bring useful MariaDB tools from various toolkits into 
a MariaDB package in 2019.

=item Others

Many people have contributed code over the years.  See each tool's
"AUTHORS" section for details.

=back

=head1 COPYRIGHT, LICENSE, AND WARRANTY

This program is copyright 2019-2021 MariaDB Corporation and/or its affiliates,
2011-2018 Percona LLC and/or its affiliates, 2010-2011 Baron Schwartz.

THIS PROGRAM IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND WITHOUT ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED
WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under
the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free Software
Foundation, version 2; OR the Perl Artistic License.  On UNIX and similar
systems, you can issue `man perlgpl' or `man perlartistic' to read these
licenses.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along with
this program; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple
Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA  02111-1307  USA.

=head1 VERSION

MariaDB Tools v6.0.0a released 2021-10-29

=cut
